Chapter 5
When I came home to West Egg that night I
was afraid for a moment that my house was
on fire. Two o’clock and the whole corner
of the peninsula was blazing with light, which
fell unreal on the shrubbery and made thin
elongating glints upon the roadside wires.
Turning a corner, I saw that it was Gatsby’s
house, lit from tower to cellar.
At first I thought it was another party, a
wild rout that had resolved itself into “hide-and-go-seek”
or “sardines-in-the-box” with all the
house thrown open to the game. But there wasn’t
a sound. Only wind in the trees, which blew
the wires and made the lights go off and on
again as if the house had winked into the
darkness. As my taxi groaned away I saw Gatsby
walking toward me across his lawn.
“Your place looks like the World’s Fair,”
I said.
“Does it?” He turned his eyes toward it
absently. “I have been glancing into some
of the rooms. Let’s go to Coney Island,
old sport. In my car.”
“It’s too late.”
“Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming-pool?
I haven’t made use of it all summer.”
“I’ve got to go to bed.”
“All right.”
He waited, looking at me with suppressed eagerness.
“I talked with Miss Baker,” I said after
a moment. “I’m going to call up Daisy
to-morrow and invite her over here to tea.”
“Oh, that’s all right,” he said carelessly.
“I don’t want to put you to any trouble.”
“What day would suit you?”
“What day would suit you?” he corrected
me quickly. “I don’t want to put you to
any trouble, you see.”
“How about the day after to-morrow?” He
considered for a moment. Then, with reluctance:
“I want to get the grass cut,” he said.
We both looked at the grass — there was
a sharp line where my ragged lawn ended and
the darker, well-kept expanse of his began.
I suspected that he meant my grass.
“There’s another little thing,” he said
uncertainly, and hesitated.
“Would you rather put it off for a few days?”
I asked.
“Oh, it isn’t about that. At least ——” He
fumbled with a series of beginnings. “Why,
I thought — why, look here, old sport, you
don’t make much money, do you?”
“Not very much.”
This seemed to reassure him and he continued
more confidently.
“I thought you didn’t, if you’ll pardon
my — You see, I carry on a little business
on the side, a sort of side line, you understand.
And I thought that if you don’t make very
much — You’re selling bonds, aren’t
you, old sport?”
“Trying to.”
“Well, this would interest you. It wouldn’t
take up much of your time and you might pick
up a nice bit of money. It happens to be a
rather confidential sort of thing.”
I realize now that under different circumstances
that conversation might have been one of the
crises of my life. But, because the offer
was obviously and tactlessly for a service
to be rendered, I had no choice except to
cut him off there.
“I’ve got my hands full,” I said. “I’m
much obliged but I couldn’t take on any
more work.”
“You wouldn’t have to do any business
with Wolfsheim.” Evidently he thought that
I was shying away from the “gonnegtion”
mentioned at lunch, but I assured him he was
wrong. He waited a moment longer, hoping I’d
begin a conversation, but I was too absorbed
to be responsive, so he went unwillingly home.
The evening had made me light-headed and happy;
I think I walked into a deep sleep as I entered
my front door. So I didn’t know whether
or not Gatsby went to Coney Island, or for
how many hours he “glanced into rooms”
while his house blazed gaudily on. I called
up Daisy from the office next morning, and
invited her to come to tea.
“Don’t bring Tom,” I warned her.
“What?”
“Don’t bring Tom.”
“Who is ‘Tom’?” she asked innocently.
The day agreed upon was pouring rain. At eleven
o’clock a man in a raincoat, dragging a
lawn-mower, tapped at my front door and said
that Mr. Gatsby had sent him over to cut my
grass. This reminded me that I had forgotten
to tell my Finn to come back, so I drove into
West Egg Village to search for her among soggy,
whitewashed alleys and to buy some cups and
lemons and flowers.
The flowers were unnecessary, for at two o’clock
a greenhouse arrived from Gatsby’s, with
innumerable receptacles to contain it. An
hour later the front door opened nervously,
and Gatsby, in a white flannel suit, silver
shirt, and gold-colored tie, hurried in. He
was pale, and there were dark signs of sleeplessness
beneath his eyes.
“Is everything all right?” he asked immediately.
“The grass looks fine, if that’s what
you mean.”
“What grass?” he inquired blankly. “Oh,
the grass in the yard.” He looked out the
window at it, but, judging from his expression,
I don’t believe he saw a thing.
“Looks very good,” he remarked vaguely.
“One of the papers said they thought the
rain would stop about four. I think it was
the Journal. Have you got everything you need
in the shape of — of tea?”
I took him into the pantry, where he looked
a little reproachfully at the Finn. Together
we scrutinized the twelve lemon cakes from
the delicatessen shop.
“Will they do?” I asked.
“Of course, of course! They’re fine!”
and he added hollowly, “ . . . old sport.”
The rain cooled about half-past three to a
damp mist, through which occasional thin drops
swam like dew. Gatsby looked with vacant eyes
through a copy of Clay’s Economics, starting
at the Finnish tread that shook the kitchen
floor, and peering toward the bleared windows
from time to time as if a series of invisible
but alarming happenings were taking place
outside. Finally he got up and informed me,
in an uncertain voice, that he was going home.
“Why’s that?”
“Nobody’s coming to tea. It’s too late!”
He looked at his watch as if there was some
pressing demand on his time elsewhere. “I
can’t wait all day.”
“Don’t be silly; it’s just two minutes
to four.”
He sat down miserably, as if I had pushed
him, and simultaneously there was the sound
of a motor turning into my lane. We both jumped
up, and, a little harrowed myself, I went
out into the yard.
Under the dripping bare lilac-trees a large
open car was coming up the drive. It stopped.
Daisy’s face, tipped sideways beneath a
three-cornered lavender hat, looked out at
me with a bright ecstatic smile.
“Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest
one?”
The exhilarating ripple of her voice was a
wild tonic in the rain. I had to follow the
sound of it for a moment, up and down, with
my ear alone, before any words came through.
A damp streak of hair lay like a dash of blue
paint across her cheek, and her hand was wet
with glistening drops as I took it to help
her from the car.
“Are you in love with me,” she said low
in my ear, “or why did I have to come alone?”
“That’s the secret of Castle Rackrent.
Tell your chauffeur to go far away and spend
an hour.”
“Come back in an hour, Ferdie.” Then in
a grave murmur: “His name is Ferdie.”
“Does the gasoline affect his nose?”
“I don’t think so,” she said innocently.
“Why?”
We went in. To my overwhelming surprise the
living-room was deserted.
“Well, that’s funny,” I exclaimed.
“What’s funny?”
She turned her head as there was a light dignified
knocking at the front door. I went out and
opened it. Gatsby, pale as death, with his
hands plunged like weights in his coat pockets,
was standing in a puddle of water glaring
tragically into my eyes.
With his hands still in his coat pockets he
stalked by me into the hall, turned sharply
as if he were on a wire, and disappeared into
the living-room. It wasn’t a bit funny.
Aware of the loud beating of my own heart
I pulled the door to against the increasing
rain.
For half a minute there wasn’t a sound.
Then from the living-room I heard a sort of
choking murmur and part of a laugh, followed
by Daisy’s voice on a clear artificial note:
“I certainly am awfully glad to see you
again.”
A pause; it endured horribly. I had nothing
to do in the hall, so I went into the room.
Gatsby, his hands still in his pockets, was
reclining against the mantelpiece in a strained
counterfeit of perfect ease, even of boredom.
His head leaned back so far that it rested
against the face of a defunct mantelpiece
clock, and from this position his distraught
eyes stared down at Daisy, who was sitting,
frightened but graceful, on the edge of a
stiff chair.
“We’ve met before,” muttered Gatsby.
His eyes glanced momentarily at me, and his
lips parted with an abortive attempt at a
laugh. Luckily the clock took this moment
to tilt dangerously at the pressure of his
head, whereupon he turned and caught it with
trembling fingers, and set it back in place.
Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the
arm of the sofa and his chin in his hand.
“I’m sorry about the clock,” he said.
My own face had now assumed a deep tropical
burn. I couldn’t muster up a single commonplace
out of the thousand in my head.
“It’s an old clock,” I told them idiotically.
I think we all believed for a moment that
it had smashed in pieces on the floor.
“We haven’t met for many years,” said
Daisy, her voice as matter-of-fact as it could
ever be.
“Five years next November.”
The automatic quality of Gatsby’s answer
set us all back at least another minute. I
had them both on their feet with the desperate
suggestion that they help me make tea in the
kitchen when the demoniac Finn brought it
in on a tray.
Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes
a certain physical decency established itself.
Gatsby got himself into a shadow and, while
Daisy and I talked, looked conscientiously
from one to the other of us with tense, unhappy
eyes. However, as calmness wasn’t an end
in itself, I made an excuse at the first possible
moment, and got to my feet.
“Where are you going?” demanded Gatsby
in immediate alarm.
“I’ll be back.”
“I’ve got to speak to you about something
before you go.”
He followed me wildly into the kitchen, closed
the door, and whispered:
“Oh, God!” in a miserable way.
“What’s the matter?”
“This is a terrible mistake,” he said,
shaking his head from side to side, “a terrible,
terrible mistake.”
“You’re just embarrassed, that’s all,”
and luckily I added: “Daisy’s embarrassed
too.”
“She’s embarrassed?” he repeated incredulously.
“Just as much as you are.”
“Don’t talk so loud.”
“You’re acting like a little boy,” I
broke out impatiently. “Not only that, but
you’re rude. Daisy’s sitting in there
all alone.”
He raised his hand to stop my words, looked
at me with unforgettable reproach, and, opening
the door cautiously, went back into the other
room.
I walked out the back way — just as Gatsby
had when he had made his nervous circuit of
the house half an hour before — and ran
for a huge black knotted tree, whose massed
leaves made a fabric against the rain. Once
more it was pouring, and my irregular lawn,
well-shaved by Gatsby’s gardener, abounded
in small, muddy swamps and prehistoric marshes.
There was nothing to look at from under the
tree except Gatsby’s enormous house, so
I stared at it, like Kant at his church steeple,
for half an hour. A brewer had built it early
in the “period” craze, a decade before,
and there was a story that he’d agreed to
pay five years’ taxes on all the neighboring
cottages if the owners would have their roofs
thatched with straw. Perhaps their refusal
took the heart out of his plan to Found a
Family — he went into an immediate decline.
His children sold his house with the black
wreath still on the door. Americans, while
occasionally willing to be serfs, have always
been obstinate about being peasantry.
After half an hour, the sun shone again, and
the grocer’s automobile rounded Gatsby’s
drive with the raw material for his servants’
dinner — I felt sure he wouldn’t eat a
spoonful. A maid began opening the upper windows
of his house, appeared momentarily in each,
and, leaning from a large central bay, spat
meditatively into the garden. It was time
I went back. While the rain continued it had
seemed like the murmur of their voices, rising
and swelling a little now and then with gusts
of emotion. But in the new silence I felt
that silence had fallen within the house too.
I went in — after making every possible
noise in the kitchen, short of pushing over
the stove — but I don’t believe they heard
a sound. They were sitting at either end of
the couch, looking at each other as if some
question had been asked, or was in the air,
and every vestige of embarrassment was gone.
Daisy’s face was smeared with tears, and
when I came in she jumped up and began wiping
at it with her handkerchief before a mirror.
But there was a change in Gatsby that was
simply confounding. He literally glowed; without
a word or a gesture of exultation a new well-being
radiated from him and filled the little room.
“Oh, hello, old sport,” he said, as if
he hadn’t seen me for years. I thought for
a moment he was going to shake hands.
“It’s stopped raining.”
“Has it?” When he realized what I was
talking about, that there were twinkle-bells
of sunshine in the room, he smiled like a
weather man, like an ecstatic patron of recurrent
light, and repeated the news to Daisy. “What
do you think of that? It’s stopped raining.”
“I’m glad, Jay.” Her throat, full of
aching, grieving beauty, told only of her
unexpected joy.
“I want you and Daisy to come over to my
house,” he said, “I’d like to show her
around.”
“You’re sure you want me to come?”
“Absolutely, old sport.”
Daisy went up-stairs to wash her face — too
late I thought with humiliation of my towels
— while Gatsby and I waited on the lawn.
“My house looks well, doesn’t it?” he
demanded. “See how the whole front of it
catches the light.”
I agreed that it was splendid.
“Yes.” His eyes went over it, every arched
door and square tower. “It took me just
three years to earn the money that bought
it.”
“I thought you inherited your money.”
“I did, old sport,” he said automatically,
“but I lost most of it in the big panic
— the panic of the war.”
I think he hardly knew what he was saying,
for when I asked him what business he was
in he answered, “That’s my affair,”
before he realized that it wasn’t the appropriate
reply.
“Oh, I’ve been in several things,” he
corrected himself. “I was in the drug business
and then I was in the oil business. But I’m
not in either one now.” He looked at me
with more attention. “Do you mean you’ve
been thinking over what I proposed the other
night?”
Before I could answer, Daisy came out of the
house and two rows of brass buttons on her
dress gleamed in the sunlight.
“That huge place there?” she cried pointing.
“Do you like it?”
“I love it, but I don’t see how you live
there all alone.”
“I keep it always full of interesting people,
night and day. People who do interesting things.
Celebrated people.”
Instead of taking the short cut along the
Sound we went down the road and entered by
the big postern. With enchanting murmurs Daisy
admired this aspect or that of the feudal
silhouette against the sky, admired the gardens,
the sparkling odor of jonquils and the frothy
odor of hawthorn and plum blossoms and the
pale gold odor of kiss-me-at-the-gate. It
was strange to reach the marble steps and
find no stir of bright dresses in and out
the door, and hear no sound but bird voices
in the trees.
And inside, as we wandered through Marie Antoinette
music-rooms and Restoration salons, I felt
that there were guests concealed behind every
couch and table, under orders to be breathlessly
silent until we had passed through. As Gatsby
closed the door of “the Merton College Library.”
I could have sworn I heard the owl-eyed man
break into ghostly laughter.
We went up-stairs, through period bedrooms
swathed in rose and lavender silk and vivid
with new flowers, through dressing-rooms and
poolrooms, and bathrooms with sunken baths
— intruding into one chamber where a dishevelled
man in pajamas was doing liver exercises on
the floor. It was Mr. Klipspringer, the “boarder.”
I had seen him wandering hungrily about the
beach that morning. Finally we came to Gatsby’s
own apartment, a bedroom and a bath, and an
Adam study, where we sat down and drank a
glass of some Chartreuse he took from a cupboard
in the wall.
He hadn’t once ceased looking at Daisy,
and I think he revalued everything in his
house according to the measure of response
it drew from her well-loved eyes. Sometimes,
too, he stared around at his possessions in
a dazed way, as though in her actual and astounding
presence none of it was any longer real. Once
he nearly toppled down a flight of stairs.
His bedroom was the simplest room of all — except
where the dresser was garnished with a toilet
set of pure dull gold. Daisy took the brush
with delight, and smoothed her hair, whereupon
Gatsby sat down and shaded his eyes and began
to laugh.
“It’s the funniest thing, old sport,”
he said hilariously. “I can’t — When
I try to ——”
He had passed visibly through two states and
was entering upon a third. After his embarrassment
and his unreasoning joy he was consumed with
wonder at her presence. He had been full of
the idea so long, dreamed it right through
to the end, waited with his teeth set, so
to speak, at an inconceivable pitch of intensity.
Now, in the reaction, he was running down
like an overwound clock.
Recovering himself in a minute he opened for
us two hulking patent cabinets which held
his massed suits and dressing-gowns and ties,
and his shirts, piled like bricks in stacks
a dozen high.
“I’ve got a man in England who buys me
clothes. He sends over a selection of things
at the beginning of each season, spring and
fall.”
He took out a pile of shirts and began throwing
them, one by one, before us, shirts of sheer
linen and thick silk and fine flannel, which
lost their folds as they fell and covered
the table in many-colored disarray. While
we admired he brought more and the soft rich
heap mounted higher — shirts with stripes
and scrolls and plaids in coral and apple-green
and lavender and faint orange, and monograms
of Indian blue. Suddenly, with a strained
sound, Daisy bent her head into the shirts
and began to cry stormily.
“They’re such beautiful shirts,” she
sobbed, her voice muffled in the thick folds.
“It makes me sad because I’ve never seen
such — such beautiful shirts before.”
After the house, we were to see the grounds
and the swimming-pool, and the hydroplane
and the mid-summer flowers — but outside
Gatsby’s window it began to rain again,
so we stood in a row looking at the corrugated
surface of the Sound.
“If it wasn’t for the mist we could see
your home across the bay,” said Gatsby.
“You always have a green light that burns
all night at the end of your dock.”
Daisy put her arm through his abruptly, but
he seemed absorbed in what he had just said.
Possibly it had occurred to him that the colossal
significance of that light had now vanished
forever. Compared to the great distance that
had separated him from Daisy it had seemed
very near to her, almost touching her. It
had seemed as close as a star to the moon.
Now it was again a green light on a dock.
His count of enchanted objects had diminished
by one.
I began to walk about the room, examining
various indefinite objects in the half darkness.
A large photograph of an elderly man in yachting
costume attracted me, hung on the wall over
his desk.
“Who’s this?”
“That? That’s Mr. Dan Cody, old sport.”
The name sounded faintly familiar.
“He’s dead now. He used to be my best
friend years ago.”
There was a small picture of Gatsby, also
in yachting costume, on the bureau — Gatsby
with his head thrown back defiantly — taken
apparently when he was about eighteen.
“I adore it,” exclaimed Daisy. “The
pompadour! You never told me you had a pompadour
— or a yacht.”
“Look at this,” said Gatsby quickly. “Here’s
a lot of clippings — about you.”
They stood side by side examining it. I was
going to ask to see the rubies when the phone
rang, and Gatsby took up the receiver.
“Yes. . . . well, I can’t talk now. . . . I
can’t talk now, old sport. . . . I said
a small town. . . . he must know what a small
town is. . . . well, he’s no use to us if
Detroit is his idea of a small town. . . . ”
He rang off.
“Come here quick!” cried Daisy at the
window.
The rain was still falling, but the darkness
had parted in the west, and there was a pink
and golden billow of foamy clouds above the
sea.
“Look at that,” she whispered, and then
after a moment: “I’d like to just get
one of those pink clouds and put you in it
and push you around.”
I tried to go then, but they wouldn’t hear
of it; perhaps my presence made them feel
more satisfactorily alone.
“I know what we’ll do,” said Gatsby,
“we’ll have Klipspringer play the piano.”
He went out of the room calling “Ewing!”
and returned in a few minutes accompanied
by an embarrassed, slightly worn young man,
with shell-rimmed glasses and scanty blond
hair. He was now decently clothed in a “sport
shirt,” open at the neck, sneakers, and
duck trousers of a nebulous hue.
“Did we interrupt your exercises?” inquired
Daisy politely.
“I was asleep,” cried Mr. Klipspringer,
in a spasm of embarrassment. “That is, I’d
been asleep. Then I got up.. ..”
“Klipspringer plays the piano,” said Gatsby,
cutting him off. “Don’t you, Ewing, old
sport?”
“I don’t play well. I don’t — I hardly
play at all. I’m all out of prac ——”
“We’ll go down-stairs,” interrupted
Gatsby. He flipped a switch. The gray windows
disappeared as the house glowed full of light.
In the music-room Gatsby turned on a solitary
lamp beside the piano. He lit Daisy’s cigarette
from a trembling match, and sat down with
her on a couch far across the room, where
there was no light save what the gleaming
floor bounced in from the hall.
When Klipspringer had played The Love Nest,
he turned around on the bench and searched
unhappily for Gatsby in the gloom.
“I’m all out of practice, you see. I told
you I couldn’t play. I’m all out of prac
——”
“Don’t talk so much, old sport,” commanded
Gatsby. “Play!”
“In the morning,
In the evening,
Ain’t we got fun——”
Outside the wind was loud and there was a
faint flow of thunder along the Sound. All
the lights were going on in West Egg now;
the electric trains, men-carrying, were plunging
home through the rain from New York. It was
the hour of a profound human change, and excitement
was generating on the air.
“One thing’s sure and nothing’s surer
The rich get richer and the poor get— children.
In the meantime,
In between time——”
As I went over to say good-by I saw that the
expression of bewilderment had come back into
Gatsby’s face, as though a faint doubt had
occurred to him as to the quality of his present
happiness. Almost five years! There must have
been moments even that afternoon when Daisy
tumbled short of his dreams — not through
her own fault, but because of the colossal
vitality of his illusion. It had gone beyond
her, beyond everything. He had thrown himself
into it with a creative passion, adding to
it all the time, decking it out with every
bright feather that drifted his way. No amount
of fire or freshness can challenge what a
man will store up in his ghostly heart.
As I watched him he adjusted himself a little,
visibly. His hand took hold of hers, and as
she said something low in his ear he turned
toward her with a rush of emotion. I think
that voice held him most, with its fluctuating,
feverish warmth, because it couldn’t be
over-dreamed — that voice was a deathless
song.
They had forgotten me, but Daisy glanced up
and held out her hand; Gatsby didn’t know
me now at all. I looked once more at them
and they looked back at me, remotely, possessed
by intense life. Then I went out of the room
and down the marble steps into the rain, leaving
them there together.